but it's a little bit like the human
energy that's put out I'm trying to
figure out who killed John F Kennedy
yeah who knows who cares I mean plenty
people get killed all akan why does it
matter that one of them had to be tonic
and
if there was some reason to believe that
there was a high-level conspiracy might
be interesting now that the evidence
against itis is overwhelmed and after
that it's just a man you know if it
happened to be a jealous husband or the
Mafia or someone else
what difference in me it's just taking
energy away from serious issues of the
ones don't matter and I think the same
is true here there are even some on the
left like Noam Chomsky and Alexander
Coburn who argue that this whole
interest in the assassination comes from
a Kennedy Reviver a Camelot yearning the
yearnings for lost Messiah
I'm giving quotes these are quotes right
from Chomsky Coburn and Chomsky and
others they challenge the notion that
Kennedy was assassinated for intending
to withdraw from Vietnam or undo the CIA
or in the Cold War these things could
not have led to his downfall because
they were not true
Kennedy was a cold warrior a counter
insurgent who wanted a military
withdrawal from Vietnam only with
victory I have argued similarly in my
book democracy for the few that in fact
indeed Kennedy was a cold warrior and a
counter insurgent and that he should not
be romanticized as a progressive Chomsky
Coburn and others acclaimed that the
change of administration that came with
JFK's assassination had no large-scale
effect on policy not even on tactics in
other words if Kennedy had lived he
likely would have fabricated a Tonkin
Gulf casas Bell I he would have
introduced ground troops in a massive
land war as Lyndon Johnson did he would
have engaged in the merciless b-52
carpet bombings of Laius Cambodia and
Vietnam as Richard Nixon did he would
have risked destroying his own electoral
base proving himself a mass murderer as
bad as Nixon Chomsky and Coburn don't
tell us how they know that all we know
is the one surviving Kennedy the Robert
Kennedy in fact went a different way
he became an anti-war critic he opposed
the war he
broke with the Johnson administration
and he said that his brother's
administration his administration had
committed terrible mistakes the evidence
we do have in fact is that John Kennedy
observed Cambodian neutrality and
negotiated a ceasefire and coalition
government in Laos which the CIA refused
to honor they preferred to back a
right-wing faction that continued the
war Chomsky says much about troop
withdrawal I just wrote a whole book on
this Camelot revisited moment but he
says very little about troop escalation
other than to offer Roger Hillman
speculation that Kennedy might well have
introduced US troops ground troops in
South Vietnam maybe so maybe not in fact
the same Hillsman noted in the New York
Times not long ago and Chomsky doesn't
note it that in 1963 Kennedy was the
only person in his administration who
opposed the introduction of u.s. ground
troops he was the only thing preventing
an escalation of the war forget the
question of withdrawal not withdrawal he
was a barrier in that sense whether or
not there are certain left analysts who
think Kennedy was or wasn't a
progressive or liberal and thinks that
the CIA had no reason to kill him or
other people had no reason to be
dissatisfied him
the fact is do they see it that way you
know entrenched interests are notorious
for not seeing the world the same way
that left analysts do in 1963 people in
right-wing circles including elements in
various intelligence organizations did
not believe that Kennedy could be
trusted with the nation's future
now some months ago on a San Francisco
talk-show I heard a guy come on I was on
kgo and he said I never said this before
I never said it it's the first time I'm
saying it but I worked for Army
Intelligence and in 1963 I was in Japan
and when he in the excepted word around
then was that Kennedy would be killed
because he was messing too much with the
intelligence community and when word
came of his death we we were all I could
hear were delighted comments like we got
the bastard
what JFK is enemy saw something was what
they saw was something different from
what Chomsky and Coburn have seen they
fixed on Kennedy's refusal to provide
air coverage
Bay of Pigs his refusal to go in with us
forces his unwillingness to launch
another invasion of Cuba is no invasion
guarantee to Khrushchev on Cuba his
atmospheric test ban treaty with Moscow
his American University speech calling
for re-examination of our Cold War
attitudes toward the Soviet Union his
unwillingness to send ground forces in a
massive form into Vietnam his antitrust
suit against General Electric his fight
with US Steel over price increases his
challenge to the Federal Reserve Board
his warm reception at labor conventions
his call for racial equality and
responsiveness to civil rights leaders
reluctant responsiveness his talk of
moving forward in a new frontier or when
no the progressive says that he admits
he has no idea who killed Kennedy
but this doesn't keep him from asserting
that the Oliver Stone film was
manipulative and that stone provided
false answers how do you know that Irwin
if you have no idea who killed Kennedy
and the remarkable thing about Irwin no
and Noam Chomsky and Alexander Coburn is
they don't know a damn thing about the
criticisms and investigation that's been
made we've said this again and again and
the rebuttals in the exchange in the
nation every almost everyone I'm said
Alexander Coburn doesn't know anything
about this case he doesn't know anything
about Lee Harvey Oswald really has no to
some of the questions I brought up they
don't know it and they never deny it
they never say anything they go on with
their with their patronizing comments
well Chomsky patronization condescension
Coburn would vitriol and venom they go
on attacking those who supposedly are
idealizing Kennedy the gullible US
public that Ervin Knoll talks about no
will condemns all of a stone for playing
on the gullibility of the American
people see he's not gullible he's cool
he doesn't fall for this he's so cool
didn't go see the movie you see
the US public has not bought the
official explanation 78% say they
believe there was a conspiracy and both
Chomsky and Coburn Coburn in the nation
chumps Kinsey magazine and again in the
letter in exchange with me both of them
dismissed that fact and point out the IG
same identical analog they point out
that in fact over seventy percent of
people also believe in miracles so what
does that prove and what if I got to do
with the question at hand that people
can have a stupid opinion about one
thing
doesn't mean they're stupid about
everything in fact Chomsky and Coburn
are themselves evidence of that
in any case the comparison is between
two different things they're comparing
the public go ability about miracles
with the public unwillingness to be
gullible about the official line of the
being said and shoved in their faces for
30 years that takes that's not dull
ability at all
Alexander Coburn and Noam Chomsky have
told us that we must not reduce great
developments in history to conspiracy
for then we lose sight of institution
class and other systemic factors of
American capitalism I don't need them to
tell me about systemic factors in
American capitalism I use the structural
analysis and all my writings but
investigating the JFK conspiracy we are
not looking for an escape from something
unpleasant and difficult that
psychiatrist Noam Chomsky speaking but
we're hitting upon the nature of state
power and what is supposedly to be a
democracy conspiracy is not something
that's encountered distinction to
structural analysis it is part of it
these guys will use conspiracy they will
use legitimacy they will finance
elections there will be publicity
campaigns they will set up liberal ish
organizations they will set up
alternative trade union movements that
will use assassins and death squads
there will you every single conceivable
thing there is and this was one of the
things they use when they had someone
who was giving them trouble when they
had someone who was standing in their
path because he was a little too bright
and too shiny when they had an agenda to
save Southeast Asia from communism they
would kill one of their own and that is
a tremendous rebel isn't revelation it
was a startling revelation to the
American public to make them realize
what kind of a gangster government and
national security state we really have
in this country and what it does around
the world
a structuralist position should not
discount the role of human agency in
history institutions were not self
generating forces the great continuities
of corporate and class interests that's
Coburn's phrase do not happen of their
own accord like reified disembodied
social force what the left critics do is
that they mistaken the low political
value of the victim JFK whom they hate
and detest that their big fears that
you're going to like him with the high
political importance of the issue and
the implications for democracy the
revelation of the gangster nature of the
state I mean captain Alfred Dreyfus back
in 1894 was a conservative militarists
clemenceau once conjectured that if his
name had not been Dreyfus he would have
been an anti Dreyfus odd does that mean
that the political struggle waged in La
Fea Dreyfus was a waste of time the
issue was quickly drawn between the
right and the left between those who
stood with the army and those who stood
with the Republic itself and with
justice the same with Benigno Aquino
Aquino was a member of the privileged
class in the Philippines he promised no
great structural changes he was even
more conservative than Kennedy does this
mean that the Filipino people should
have dismissed the conspiracy that led
to his assassination as an event of no
experience so are just another ruling
class Pig what do we care instead they
used it as ammunition against the hated
Marcos regime as a revelation of what
that government was really doing
Archbishop Romero of El Salvador he was
a member of the Salvadoran aristocracy
he could not have made it to the top of
the church hierarchy otherwise when he
was ordained they came with presents
they hugged and kissed him and the
minute he opened up his mouth and made
some critical remarks and about the
Warrens some favorable remarks about the
poor he was assassinated I doubt if he
hadn't been assassinated the Salvadoran
history would have been much different
does this mean that solidarity groups in
this country and El Salvador should not
have tried to make his murder and
that revealed the homicidal gangsta
nature of the Salvadoran state instead
of seizing the opportunity some left
writers condescendingly ascribe a host
of mass psychology motivations and
emotional needs for those of us who are
concerned about the JFK assassination
they sakala psychologize about our
illusions of false dreams our longings
for messiahs and father figures our
inability to face unpleasant realities
the way they can they deliver
patronizing admissions about our
conspiracy captivation and Camelot
yearnings they urge us not to escape
into fantasy they are the cognoscenti
who guide us and out left us on the JFK
assassination a subject about which they
don't know a goddamn thing and whose
significance they will never be able and
have not been able to grasp I have a
different name for our interests it is
not JFK worship is not Camelot yearnings
as the left critics would say it's not
big evils and conspiracy titillation as
the mainstream media would say our
interest is born of democratic struggle
a desire to know what is going on a
desire to have rulers who are worthy of
our name and the name of democracy thank
you John judge opened the annual
coalition on political assassinations
meeting of researchers and authors with
remarks about left denial and double
standards around the issues of
conspiracy and assassination the other
thing I thought if you can bear with it
I'd share with you as a little bit of a
character by the name of Noam Chomsky
some of you have heard of this person
he's as Mike Albert of Z Magazine says
the only left intellectual in America I
don't know which word without to quibble
with but I think there must be a few
more but in any case he's probably the
most published and mentioned and
listened to left intellectual in America
so here he is this is a book that's just
come out called understanding power the
indispensable Chomsky and it's kind of
an interesting book because instead of
it being his lectures where he sounds
exactly as he sounds when he writes this
is this is him in question-and-answer
session so you actually get a little
spontaneity in a range of topics from
the crowd and you know it's a kind of
interesting mix tonight you know
certainly he has things to say but this
particular section in here and it's
interesting too that this book the
footnotes are not included in this book
there they give a website on the back of
the of the book to go through the look
at the footnotes so that's a new
publishing feat and saved your paper but
this particular section is called
conspiracy theories and someone in the
audience says no you mentioned earlier
how conspiracy theories take up a lot of
energy in the left movements these days
I don't any leftist it's been any time
listening to them particularly on the
west coast and with respect to the
Kennedy assassination and you said that
in your view it's totally wasted effort
do you really feel there's nothing at
all worthwhile in that kind of inquiry
I'm doing this so you can see how this
logic works because it's a powerful one
and one that's kept us out of a lot of
the discourse in the alternative press
well let me put it this way every
example we find of planning decisions in
the society is a case where some people
got together and tried to use whatever
power they could draw upon to achieve a
result and if you like those are
conspiracies so that's the first straw
man everything is a conspiracy that
means that almost everything that
happens in the world is a conspiracy of
the board of directors of General Motors
gets together and decides what kind of
car to produce next year that's a
conspiracy every business decision every
editorial decisions a conspiracy if the
linguistics department I work in decides
who to appoint next year that's a
conspiracy okay obviously that's not
interesting all decisions involved
people so the real question is are there
groupings well outside the structures of
the major institutions of the society
which go around them hijack them
undermine them and pursue other courses
without an institutional base and so on
and so forth so this is the second straw
man so be a conspiracy you have to be
totally outside the structures of power
and that's a question of fact do
significant things happen because groups
or subgroups are acting and secret
outside the main structures of
institutional power well as I look over
history I don't find much of that I mean
there's some too
cases for instance at one point a group
of Nazi generals thought of
assassinating Hitler okay that's a
conspiracy but things like that are real
blips on the screen as far as I can see
now if people want to spend time
studying the group of Nazi generals who
decided it was a time to get rid of
Hitler that's a fine topic for a
monograph maybe somebody will write a
thesis about it but we're not going to
learn anything about the world from it
and at least nothing that generalizes to
the next case it's all going to be
historically contingent and specific and
it'll show you how one particular group
of people acted under particular
circumstances fine I read that to bill
Kelly nee Howell he's found for direct
connections between the plotters in the
Hitler assassination situation in the
John F Kennedy assassination including
Baron Mary Bancroft Allen Dulles as
mistress who spirited Gracias the major
plotter out of Germany at the end of the
situation but there are many others and
she of course is good friends with the
Ruth Payne's mother but these are blips
on the screen and if you look at the
place where investigations of
conspiracies is absolutely flourished
modern American history
I think what's notable is the absence of
such cases at least as I read the record
they almost never happen I mean
occasionally you'll find something like
the Reaganites with their off-the-shelf
subversive and terrorist activities but
that was sort of a fringe operation and
in fact part of the reason why a lot of
it got exposed so quickly is because the
institutions are simply too powerful to
tolerate very much of that stuff and as
far as the Pentagon goes sure the
services will push their end account
interest but typically they do it in a
pre transparent way or take the CIA
which is considered the source of a lot
of these conspiracies we have a ton of
information about it and as I read the
information the CIA is basically just an
obedient branch of the White House I
mean sure the CIA has done things around
the world but as far as we know it
hasn't done anything on its own there's
very little evidence in fact I don't
know of any that the CIA is some kind of
rogue elephant you know often its own
doing things what the record shows is
that the CIA is just an agency of the
White House which sometimes carries out
operations for which the executive
branch
wants what's called plausible
deniability in other words if something
goes wrong we don't want it to look like
we did it those guys in the CIA did it
and we can throw some of them to the
Wolves if we need to and that's
basically the role of the CIA along with
mostly just collection of information
it's the same with the Trilateral
Commission the Council on Foreign
Relations and all the other things that
people are racing around search increase
conspiracy theories about there are just
nothing organizations of course there
they're obviously rich people get
together and talk to each other and play
golf with each other and plan together
that's not a big surprise but these
conspiracy theories people are putting
their energies into have virtually
nothing to do with the way the
institutions actually function the
Kennedy assassination cult is probably
the most striking case I mean you have
all these people doing super scholarly
intensive research and trying to find
out just who talked to whom and what the
exact contours were of this supposed
high-level conspiracy and it's all
complete nonsense
as soon as you look into the various
theories they always collapse and
there's just nothing there but in many
places the left is just falling apart on
the basis of these sheer cults so then
this man in the audience has the
perspicacity to ask the next question
which I always say as trafficking and
here he goes well it's maybe one
exception though what about the Martin
Luther King assassination
now tell tell me if this is the same
person you just heard speaking that's
interesting see that's the one case
where you can imagine pretty plausible
reasons why people would have wanted to
kill him and I wouldn't be in the least
surprised if there was in fact the real
conspiracy behind that one and probably
a high level conspiracy I mean the
mechanisms were there maybe they would
have hired somebody from the Mafia or
something to do it but that conspiracy
theories perfectly plausible I think and
it's interesting I'm not aware that
there's been very much inquiry into it
or if there has been and I haven't heard
about it but in an in the case of the
one that everybody's excited about
Kennedy I mean nobody's even come up
with a plausible reason
in fact that's a pretty dramatic
contrast isn't it the case of the King
assassination in the Sonics face very
plausible and the case of the Kennedy
assassination is on its face extremely
implausible and yet look at the
difference in treatment well I hate to
tell you but the people would unearth
the King assassination are the people
that on earth the John F Kennedy
assassination and if you think that the
CIA is a pillow organization that waits
for the next president to come in and
tell it what to do I suggest to come
down to DC sometimes those agencies last
in perpetuity since they were created in
1948 and the presidents come and go
it's like Bill Moyers trying to tell us
that the problem is is that with the
government is that we have these
otherwise legitimate government
functions but every once in a while to
get something done they have to dip
their hands in the dirt and hang around
with these Gun Runners and drug runners
and these people they really shouldn't
associate themselves with and if they
just stop doing that things would be
okay whereas my view of the secret
government is that it is the gun and
drug run it is an is the criminals that
are the government and they in turn get
some people in three-piece suits to
stand up and pretend to be the
government on their behalf but you see
if you if you take this position that it
has to be totally outside the structures
of power then of course it's meaningless
but it isn't outside the structures of
power it's the way it works it's
business as usual and you know we know
that from our own study of the history
and to say that that is useless to study
the details is striking enough but the
bottom line for Chomsky is do you like
the guy or not if you don't like him it
wasn't a conspiracy and that's really
what it comes to
he doesn't think from his left critique
of Kennedy the Kennedy was worth killing
and he was just a ruling class bastard
like the rest he had a common you know
he was doing all the dirt you know so
why bother studying it and if you think
that killing the president could make
any difference you don't understand how
class structure works you don't have to
understand how things happen you know
and you're just a starry-eyed liberal to
think it makes any difference and they
would no kill Kennedy because after all
Chomsky didn't like him and he wasn't
worth killing but it's not the left
critique of Kennedy that makes any
difference it's the right critique of
Kennedy that makes the difference it's
not what Chomsky thought omits what
lemay thought of him because Chomsky
isn't going to shoot him and curtis
lemay would and that's the difference
and that's what you have to look at you
can go down the south today and you can
see in the homes of the poor on the wall
pictures of Jesus Martin Luther King and
the Kennedy brothers now you can stick
your left as nose as far as you want in
the air and say that was false hope but
it was hope and it was a hope they knew
was moving people and they knew that
Kennedy was responding to popular
movements and it's like hope that they
meant to kill in Memphis and in Los
Angeles and in Dallas here in 1963
because there was somebody for the last
time and the two things I'd say the last
president that actually responded to the
public will since that time and also the
last one that had enough brains between
his ears to make them worth blowing out
and this attitude you know turns around
completely when you talk about King and
that's why I say you know ask these
fellows from the left we say there's no
such thing it was a conspiracy to
explain the King assassination and
suddenly they become Wilder conspiracy
theorists than us because after all
there was a reason to kill Martin Luther
King well let's see this weekend if we
can figure out if there was a reason to
kill John F Kennedy